The study and prediction of human movement can be traced back along a
fascinating trajectory, to the ancient Greeks, when the famous philosopher
Aristotle left documented records about human walking (Harris & Smith (2007)).
Skipping forward to the 19th century, the Weber brothers analyzed gait temporal
and stride parameters using experimental measurements. In their published
work, they studied human gait in both mechanical and physiological aspects
(Kisner et al. (2017)). In recent decades, the study of human motion has
increased exponentially, thanks to the development of video camera systems
Gavrila & Davis (1996); Karaulova et al. (2002); Allard et al. (1998); Zatsiorsky
& Zaciorskij (2002)). Such camera systems, with or without force-sensing
platforms, make the study of human movement feasible and accurate. They
are often combined with electromyographic (EMG) sensors and other hardware,
and can provide important information about the causal relationship between
muscle activation and resulting human movement, as well as about deviating
gait patterns that may arise in persons with sensorimotor disorders. They do,
however, generally require specialized equipment and are often installed in a
lab, which can limit their applicability in some contexts.
On this note, other wearable sensors have become prevalent in the past few
decades, and can complement or even replace video camera systems in some
settings, making it possible to study human motion in more versatile settings
(Takeda et al. (2009); Reenalda et al. (2016); Seel et al. (2014b)). These sensors
are generally cost-effective, non-obtrusive, and can be worn or attached to
the body, inside or outside of a lab environment. They often include inertial
measurement units (IMUs), which contain accelerometers, and gyroscopes and
magnetometers, to measure segment acceleration and angular velocities, as well
as electromyographic (EMG) sensors to measure muscle excitation and foot
switches, which detect contact between the foot and the ground. These wearable
sensors can be donned simultaneously and capture data at a high sampling
frequency, resulting in a large amount of data.
Machine learning (ML) is an effective tool to extract prominent features of
large datasets and make statistical inference from these data. ML has a great
capability of solving classification, regression, and decision-making problems,
and as such, can enhance motion analyses through data-driven prediction. As
12
1. Introduction
just a few examples, Derlatka & Bogdan (2015) used K nearest neighbors (KNN)
to measure the mathematical distance of the IMU data points between different
gait phases to find similarities. Derlatka & Ihnatouski (2010) applied decision
tree (DT) technique to estimate foot contact (FC) pressure during walking.
Martinez-Hernandez et al. (2017) used Bayesian network classifier (NB) to
recognize daily activities and gait phases.
Unlike data-driven approaches, musculoskeletal simulation techniques gen-
erally aim to model the underlying mechanisms of human motion, making it
possible to interpret interactions between muscular control, kinematics, and
kinetics involved in human movements. Musculoskeletal models commonly
represent a complicated neuromuscular control system in which muscles produce
forces as a function of their architectures, lengths, velocities, and activation lev-
els. A muscle’s length and velocity is directly related to its attachments, moment
arms, and joint kinematics, and muscle activation can be approximated from
experimental data acquisition, specifically EMG signals. There are generally 3
approaches to simulate human movement using musculoskeletal models, namely
movement prescription, tracking, and prediction. For prescription and tracking
methods, motions and forces are recorded with motion capture system, joint
angles, and velocities are derived through inverse kinematics, and joint torques
are obtained through inverse dynamics. The muscle force redundancy problem
is usually solved using optimization approaches, such as static optimization.
These methods are not capable of generating and predicting new motions in a
novel environment. In a predictive simulation, new motions can be produced
through forward simulation, but muscle excitations must be generated first.
A subset of machine learning, called reinforcement learning, can be useful to
solve this problem. Reinforcement learning has been used to train controllers to
drive complex humanoid models, though the resulting behaviors and motion can
generally be not entirely representative of normal human motion (Heess et al.
(2017); Peng et al. (2018); Rajeswaran et al. (2017)). Combining reinforcement
learning with musculoskeletal modeling can help solve for individual muscle
excitations that produce more natural and realistic human motion.
This thesis focuses on human gait with wearable sensors and ML techniques.
First, we leverage the power of ML to predict gait behaviors and locomotion
modes using large datasets collected from wearable sensors (i.e., foot switches,
IMUs, and EMG sensors). Finally, we predict human walking in a physics-based
environment using a gait controller optimized by reinforcement learning (RL)
with minimal use of domain knowledge.
1.1. Gait phases
Gait analysis is the systematic study of bipedal human motion in daily life,
presenting patterns for limbs and joints during locomotion. Walking is the most
common mode of locomotion, with an average daily step count of approximately
9500 in adults (Bohannon (2007)). Although most people can effortlessly
walk every day, human gait is a complicated behavior that requires concerted1.1. Gait phases
3
contributions from the nervous system, muscles, and bones to propel the body
and to maintain static and dynamic balance. A gait cycle is defined here as
starting when one foot strikes the ground and ending when the same foot strikes
the ground again. A gait cycle can be divided into several phases, such as the
stance phase, when the foot is in contact with the ground, and the swing phase,
when the limb is in the air. These phases are demarcated by gait events, such
as ipsilateral (same side) FC, contralateral (opposing side) foot off, etc. Gait
phases are thus defined as durations between consecutive gait events. Several
variations have been used to further define gait phases in a gait cycle. We,
however, use the definitions and five gait cycles developed by Gage et al. (2009)
(Figure 1.1):
• loading response, which begins at the ipsilateral FC and ends at the
contralateral foot-off. This is also the first phase of double support.
• mid-stance, which begins at the contralateral foot off and ends at the
rise of the ipsilateral heel.
• terminal stance, which begins at the ipsilateral heel rise and ends at
contralateral FC.
• pre-swing, which begins at the contralateral FC and ends at the ipsilateral
foot off. This is also the second phase of double support.
• swing, which begins at the ipsilateral foot off and ends at the ipsilateral
FC.
Figure 1.1: A gait schematic describing 5 gait phases for the right side: loading re-
sponse (LR), mid-stance (MS), terminal stance (TS), pre-swing (PSw), and swing
(Sw). This figure was generated in the open-source software SCONE (Geijten-
beek (2019)).
During loading response (LR), the heel acts as a first rocker, wherein the
heel usually contacts the ground, the ankle plantarflexes to control forefoot
contact and the knee flexes for shock absorption. In the mid-stance (MS) phase,
the tibia advances over the stationary foot through ankle dorsiflexion, while the
knee and hip extend. In the terminal stance (TS) phase, the center of pressure
advances forward along the forefoot. In pre-swing (PSw), the final phase of
stance, the limb prepares to leave the ground and advance into swing (Sw).
The first four phases have also been described according to the foot and ankle
function by Perry & Davids (1992) as heel rocker, ankle rocker, forefoot rocker,4
1. Introduction
and toe rocker, respectively. During the swing (SW) phase, the ipsilateral leg is
advanced as the hip flexes and the knee first flexes to achieve foot clearance
then extends to prepare the leg for the next FC.
Studies have shown that during different gait phases, activity from many
muscles can be decomposed into a linear combination of basic functions (Lac-
quaniti et al. (2012); Chvatal & Ting (2013); d’Avella & Lacquaniti (2013)),
which vary when the gait speed and modes change. Thus, it is important to
identify characteristics of the gait phases during different walking speeds. In
addition, accurate gait phase identification is fundamental for controlling active
lower limb assistive devices, e.g., exoskeletons, in rehabilitation or treatment of
people with disabilities that affect walking ability. Martini et al. (2019) provided
hip flexor assistance during swing to reduce the energy cost of locomotion, using
a powered hip exoskeleton called the Active Pelvis Orthosis. Kazerooni et al.
(2006) divided a gait cycle into a ”loaded” stance phase and an ”unloaded” swing
phase, and hybrid control was applied in an exoskeleton called the Berkeley
Lower Extremity Exoskeleton. Position control was used during stance, and
positive feedback control was applied during swing. Furthermore, assistive
device users should be able to not only walk on level ground but also uneven
terrains as well as ramps and stairs. These different gaits are referred to here
as different locomotion modes, and include level-ground walking, ramp/stair
ascent, and ramp/stair descent. Powered exoskeletons must be designed and
developed to adjust device impedance, maintain stability, and provide the proper
torque to generate smooth limb and joint motion throughout the gait cycle in
various locomotion modes (Sup et al. (2008); Eilenberg et al. (2010); Lusardi
et al. (2013); Tucker et al. (2015)). Thus, detecting gait phases, gait events and
locomotion modes is crucial for seamless control of lower limb exoskeletons.
1.2. Gait trajectory
The term gait trajectory, or gait kinematics, refers to the positions, velocities,
and accelerations of body segments and/or joints as a function of time during
walking. Gait trajectory is collected via motion capture systems and/or wearable
sensors and analyzed in three anatomical planes, i.e., sagittal, frontal, and
transverse planes. The ability to predict body segments trajectories can help
to solve many problems in movement science, such as tripping, slipping, and
loss of balance (Lencioni et al. (2019); Hobbelen & Wisse (2007); Yang et al.
(2019)). The application in focus in this thesis is the design and control of
wearable assistive devices. In such exoskeletons, trajectory-tracking controllers
are widely adopted to create repetitive motion patterns (Bharadwaj et al.
(2005)). Tagliamonte et al. (2019) proposed a novel control algorithm for torque-
controlled exoskeletons, in which the exerted torque timing depended on the
angular velocity variation. Specifically, the higher the angular velocity, the
shorter the time the controller is active. Pan et al. (2019) built a 4-motor
control system to apply torque to the hip and knee using joint angular velocities
as a speed command. Thus, angular velocity forms a suitable basis to develop
fine exoskeleton control.1.3. Wearable sensors
5
1.3. Wearable sensors
To describe human walking, three types of data are considered: kinematics,
kinetics, and EMG. Kinematics data include orientation and displacement of
body segments, joint angles, and joint angular velocities. Kinetics data include
ground reaction forces, and can include joint torques and powers. Muscle
activation patterns are analyzed through the EMG signals associated with
an ensemble of action potentials in the nervous system (Merletti & Di Torino
(1999)). The use of wearable sensors to analyze human motion is growing rapidly,
owing to their portability, low cost, and low processing power (Heikenfeld et al.
(2018); Mukhopadhyay (2014)). For example, foot switches are widely used to
detect gait events such as FC and toe-off (TO), as they detect contact between
the foot and the floor as on-off signals (Hausdorff et al. (1995); Bamberg et al.
(2008)). IMUs and EMG sensors are widely used as inputs to algorithms for
human motion discrimination. In addition, the data fusion of these sensors has
attracted extensive research interest.
1.3.1. Foot switches
Foot switches are a golden standard for gait phase recognition since they can
detect FC with the ground during a gait cycle (Abdul Razak et al. (2012)).
Foot switches generally consist of piezoresistive sensors, which are placed under
the sole. They can also be embedded into footwear to measure FC. There are
often between 2 and 4 foot switches placed under the foot, and each registers a
different voltage upon contact with the ground. The extend of FC can then be
deduced from the total voltage registered (Figure 1.2). Foot switches can be
equipped with ML, with or without signal processing, for automatic gait phase
recognition in able-bodied subjects and in persons with gait pathology (Howell
et al. (2013); Zhang et al. (2019)).
1.3.2. IMUs
IMUs are widely used wearable sensors in gait analysis. IMUs are electronic
devices that combine accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers to measure
segment acceleration, angular velocity, and magnetic field intensity of three
orthogonal axes. IMUs can, for instance, be attached to the foot, shank, thigh
and pelvis to measure segment and joint kinematics during gait. Accelerometers
and gyroscopes can measure the linear acceleration and angular rate of joint
segments, and magnetometers provide a reference for body orientation, as their
signals are insensitive to dynamic motions. Therefore, such a device is suitable
for estimating and determining changes in the lower extremity segment relative
to the magnetic North or the vertical axis in gait analysis (Tao et al. (2012)).
Many studies use IMUs for gait phase recognition. Bejarano et al. (2014)
proposed an adaptive algorithm based on inertial and magnetic sensors to detect
gait events. They reported excellent performance in people with and without
gait pathology. From IMU data, Qi et al. (2015) detected foot displacement and
classified heel strike, heel off, TO, and mid-swing gait phases during different6
1. Introduction
Figure 1.2: A representative foot switch signal on the right foot during level-
ground walking.
walking speeds. They found no significant variation in recognition accuracy
between different walking speeds. Seel et al. (2014a) proposed a real-time
method to detect gait events using accelerometers and gyroscopes. They based
their algorithm on setting a specific threshold for foot acceleration and angular
velocity for each gait event. They reported that 95% of gait events were correctly
identified, despite the variation between subjects and walking velocities.
