We may still have a month and a half to go before 2023 ends, but deals for the big, foreign summer gigs of 2024 are starting to be sealed.

A few days after Pulp, Release Athens dropped another hard-sounding musical bomb by announcing the live performances of Judas Priest and Bruce Dickinson that will take place on Sunday, July 21, at Plateia Nerou.

The famous representatives of the international heavy metal scene and the singer of Iron Maiden will be in Athens and play on the same stage with a landmark night for fans of hard sound.

Judas Priest started in 1969 in Birmingham, England and forever changed the face of heavy metal. In their more than 50 years of existence, no dithyramb has yet to be written about Rob Halford’s company.

They reached unimaginable heights with albums such as “Hell Bent for Leather” (’78), “British Steel”, (’80), “Point of Entry” (’81), “Screaming for Vengeance” (’82), “Painkiller ” (’90), “Firepower” (2018) and continue unscathed to this day.

Immortal epics like “The Hellion,” “Electric Eye,” “Riding on the Wind,” “The Sentinel,” “A Touch of Evil,” “Rapid Fire,” “You’ve Got Another Thing Comin’,” ” Painkiller”, “Metal Gods”, “Breaking the Law”, “Living After Midnight” are among their endless arsenal of songs that are permanently in the heart of every metalhead on the planet!

Judas Priest aims to overcome a flat 2022 showing, bringing their most extensive production and upcoming new record. “Invincible Shield” is released on March 8th, and already in the lead single, “Panic Attack”, they sound in great form, exciting millions of metal fans worldwide. It is good for a band on the 19th album of its long career.

I just wanted to let you know that Bruce Dickinson needs no introduction. He is one of the best and most distinctive voices – and presences – of heavy metal and, simultaneously, a restless and learned man.

Frontman of Iron Maiden, one of the most emblematic bands not only of the hard sound but of the entire spectrum of rock music, author, businessman, pilot, screenwriter, spoken-word performer and sure that 2024 will be his year.

His 7th solo album, ‘The Mandrake Project’, out in early 2024, is the next step in an illustrious career that has already spanned over 45 years, while the highly anticipated first sample ‘Afterglow of Ragnarok‘ will be available on 1 December.

Having sold over 100 million records with Iron Maiden, Dickinson began a successful run of solo records in 1990 with “Tattooed Millionaire”. In 1994, he made history with his appearances in the chaos of war in Bosnia, captured in the award-winning documentary “Scream For Me Sarajevo” (2018).

He continued his solo career, alongside Iron Maiden’s activity, with characteristic albums such as “Accident Of Birth” (1997) and “The Chemical Wedding” (1998), but did not return to it after the release of “Tyranny Of Souls”, in 2005.

“The Mandrake Project” finds him reuniting with his almost permanent collaborator, guitarist and producer Roy Z, who has worked with both Judas Priest and Halford.

Besides him, the band accompanying Bruce Dickinson consists of Tanya O’Callaghan (bass), Dave Moreno (drums) and the Italian keyboardist Mistheria.

On the evening of July 21st, we will hear these new songs for the first time, of course, along with some Iron Maiden classics.

Tickets go on sale Thursday, November 16th at noon, HERE for €50 and a limited number of tickets. After they are sold out, it will continue at €55. The next phases will be announced along the way.

READ MORE: An Eastern Odyssey- The Australian Byzantine Choir prepares an epic production in commemoration of 100 years since the Asia Minor catastrophe.
